WHAT IS NODEJS ?

In a nutshell, NodeJS is JavaScript on the server. Well, now you might think what is NodeJS on the server ? Let me explain first JavaScript on the browser or on the client.

Say there is a client C, and a web-server S, Client C sends requests to web server S for webpages.
S normally has a folder called public, this folder would contain JS files to be processed on the browser. S can also contain other files called static files.
Static files can be HTML, CSS, images and other files which can be sent from S to C and doesn't changes i.e. static over the transmission.
Reason this folder is called public which is on S is because all the files inside public can be viewed by people or C via their browsers.

So now, JS files in public folder are sent back to the client and are processed by JS engine on the client side.
e.g. JS engine of Chrome is called V8 engine.

NodeJS runs JS on the server, so if we use NodeJS then we will have another folder on S, say this folder is called backend, backend folder will also have js files in it
but these JS files are going to be node JS files, these are the files which are to be processed on the server side, and aren't meant to be processed on the client side or to 
be sent to client. 

Backend files allows us to send dynamic responses to the client based on the time of day, name, profile picture etc. JS files in backend perform the role what is done by
PHP, C#, JAVA i.e. other types of conventional backend languages we are familiar with. So backend contains JS files that are processed on the server, and allow us to do dynamic
responses back to client.

NodeJS is not just similar to PHP, JAVA or C#. Say a LAMP stack which is a very popular and conventional way of running servers. It comprises of 
Linux OS, Apache Server,  MySQL Database and PHP as backend language (server side logic).

NodeJS files in backend are similar to PHP files in P of LAMP and in LAMP we also have A - Apache which is just used to create the server, but NodeJS can perform both that is
create the server, as well as act as the language for server side logic. Node replaces utility of Apache and PHP.

NodeJS based servers conventionally has a file called server.js which is a JavaScript file which creates the server itself.

NodeJS has 2 components to it : (i). Server side logic which runs upon requests, same function done by conventional languages like JAVA, PHP, C# etc.
(ii). Also can be used to build the server itself which is done by Apache in LAMP stack.

Node has server side logic which runs on S upon the requests by C but it could also be used to build the server itself. This gives us great flexibility in building our server.

Next : Structure of NodeJS